.TH VAT-OPERATE 8 "2026-06-10" "versatile-autoreg-vat" "System Administration"
.SH NAME
vat-operate \- VAT JSON inventory transformer
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B echo "$INVENTORY"
|
.B vat-operate
.B \-\-preset
.I name
.RB [ \-\-source-component
.IR component ]
.RB [ \-\-direction
.IR direction ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B vat-operate
reads a VA* inventory JSON
.RI ( {"clients": [...]} )
from standard input, applies the named preset pipeline, and writes the
transformed JSON to standard output.
.PP
If the preset is not found, if a pipeline step fails, or if
.B fail_mode
is
.BR passthrough ,
.B vat-operate
outputs the original inventory unchanged and exits with code 0.
It never blocks the calling component's cycle.
.PP
Preset files are YAML and are searched in order:
.TP
.I /etc/vat/presets.d/*.yaml
Administrator presets (higher precedence).
.TP
.I /usr/share/vat/presets/*.yaml
Package-distributed presets.
.PP
A preset name does not have to match the file name. Multiple presets may
live in the same file.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-\-preset " name"
Name of the preset to apply. Mandatory.
.TP
.BI \-\-source-component " component"
Calling component: one of
.BR VAS ,
.BR VAC ,
.BR VAL ,
.BR VAF .
Used to match against
.B match.source_component
in the preset. If the preset lists components and this value is not among
them, the preset is skipped (passthrough). Optional but recommended.
.TP
.BI \-\-direction " direction"
Data direction:
.B upstream
(data flowing to an upper VAS),
.B downstream
(data flowing to hooks or local consumers), or
.BR both .
Matched against the preset's
.B direction
field. Optional but recommended.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Show usage summary and exit.
.SH PIPELINE STEPS
Steps are defined in the preset's
.B pipeline
list and applied in order.
.TP
.B select_clients
Filter which clients pass based on
.BR status ,
.BR ip_prefix ,
.B has_key
and
.BR limit .
.TP
.B filter_keys
Control which keys inside
.B extra_imperative
and
.B extra_informative
are included (whitelist/blacklist modes).
.TP
.B transform
Rename keys within the extras. With
.BR "defaults.drop: true" ,
unlisted keys are removed (implicit whitelist after renaming).
.TP
.B truncate_lists
Limit the number of elements in arrays inside the extras. Accepts a
global
.B max_items_global
for all arrays in a block, or per-path
.B max_items
rules.
.TP
.B anonymize
Hash or redact named fields in each client. Hash mode (
.BR mode: hash )
runs a single
.BR sha256sum (1)
pass per field across all clients. Redact mode (
.BR mode: redact )
replaces values with a configurable token. Supports dot-notation for
nested fields (e.g.
.BR "extra_imperative.user" ).
.TP
.B limit_depth
Limit JSON nesting depth inside the extras. Deeper nodes are either
stringified (
.BR strategy: stringify )
or set to null (
.BR strategy: truncate ).
Paths listed in
.B paths_exempt
are preserved at full depth even if they exceed
.BR max_depth .
.TP
.B json_schema_validation
Validate clients against a JSON Schema (draft-07). Requires
.BR python3-jsonschema .
Clients failing validation are dropped from the result when
.BR "fail_mode: drop" .
.TP
.B jq_arbitrary
Apply an arbitrary
.BR jq (1)
filter to the full inventory. Escape hatch for cases not covered by the
structured steps. Errors are logged with the first line of the jq error message.
.SH FAIL MODES
.TP
.B passthrough
(default) Return the original inventory on any error. The calling
component continues normally.
.TP
.B abort
Exit with code 1. The calling component handles the failure.
.TP
.B drop
Return
.B {"clients":[]}
on error.
.PP
.B fail_mode
can be set at the file level (
.B defaults.fail_mode
) and overridden per preset. The
.B json_schema_validation
step also accepts its own
.BR fail_mode .
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success (including passthrough).
.TP
.B 1
Fatal error: invalid argument, or
.B fail_mode=abort
triggered.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B VAT_LOG_LEVEL
Overrides the preset's
.B log_level
setting at runtime.
.B no
|
.B normal
|
.B debug
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/vat/presets.d/
Administrator preset directory (higher precedence).
.TP
.I /usr/share/vat/presets/example.yaml
Reference preset file with all steps documented.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR val (8),
.BR vaf (8),
.BR jq (1),
.BR yq (1)
.SH AUTHOR
Gabriel Navia <correos@gabrielnav.es>
